Course Description
This course introduces you to the fundamental theory of computational fluid dynamics with a basic hands on experience of the CFD tools. The course will kick start your CFD journey and will give you flavor of all basic modalities of the CFD. The course is designed in such a way that a coherent linkage is established between a ranges of CFD concepts and practical learning. The course is divided into four modules. The first three modules are focused towards the theoretical understanding of the fundamentals of CFD. The last module is focused towards the practical hands on experience of the CFD tools which familiarize the user with the CFD software.

Course Outcomes:

Learning of governing equations of fluid flow and their derivation
Learning concepts of discretization and discretization scheme
Learning of boundary and initial value conditions
Learning concepts of residuals , convergence and divergence
Learning fundamental steps of a CFD analysis
Learning basics of turbulence modelling
Learning about errors and uncertainties in CFD
Getting familiar with the CFD tools and techniques.
 

Modules:

Fundamentals of CFD with hands on experience is divided into four modules. The contents of each module are summarized below.

 

Week 1:

In Module-1 following contents will be covered.

Fluids and methods of studying fluids
Wind tunnel testing and its limitations
Similarity principle in wind tunnel testing
Overview of non-linear partial differential equations
Overview of residuals , convergence and divergence
Control volume , finite volume and finite difference method
Boundary and initial value conditions
Reynolds transport theorem
 

Week 2:

Substantial derivative
Derivation of continuity equation
Derivation of Navier-Stokes equation
Derivation of Energy equation
 

Week 3:

Discretization and discretization scheme
Explicit and implicit methods
Steps for a CFD analysis
Introduction to turbulence modelling and RANS , LES and DES
Y+ value and courant number
Errors in a CFD analysis
Week 4, 5:

Drag validation of blunt body in CFD tools
Lift and drag validation of a 2D airfoil
Lift and drag validation of a 3D rectangular wing
 

Who shall attend this course?

Anyone with the engineering and sciences background who is interested to switch between experimental and numerical methods of predicting the behavior of fluids.
Application & Theory Weightage:

65% Theory – 35% Applied learning

Cases Studies:

3 (three) case studies are included in this course with are mentioned in the last module of the course.

Reference Books:

D.Anderson Computational Fluid Dynamics (An introduction)
Versteeg, H.K. and Malalasekera, W., 2007. An introduction to computational fluid dynamics: the finite volume method. Pearson education.
 

Software:

Following softwares will be covered in this course.

Ansys Design Modeler
Ansys Mesher/Ansys ICEM CFD
Ansys Fluent
Techplot 360
